COMP 326/526                  Assignment 2                         Fall 2014

Issued: September 29, 2014                             Due: October 13, 2014

1. Pipeline Basics [20 marks]

Consider the f | d | x | m | w pipeline, where the '|' are pipeline latches.
Latch names are derived from the box names on either side.

a) [10 marks] To which latch does each box write?  From which latch does
each box read?  Is there precisely one latch that can be written to, or
read from, by a given box?  Explain.  Next, draw the space-time diagram
for the code below, and consider the flow of value "r1".

dadd r1,r2,r3
dadd r4,r1,r5
dadd r6,r1,r7

Do you wish to modify your earlier answer?  Explain.

b) [10 marks] Focus on the first instruction alone.  What does the f-box
send to the d-box?  What does the d-box send to the x-box?  Do either the
m-box or the w-box receive anything from the f-box?  Explain.

2. Linear Pipelining [30 marks]

Use the following code:

loop: ld    r1,0(r2)
      daddi r1,r1,#1
      sd    r1,0(r2)
      daddi r2,r2,#4
      dsub  r4,r3,r2
      bnez  r4,loop

a) [5 marks] How many flow dependences does this code contain?  Is there
one flow dependence that is different from the others?  Explain.

b) [5 marks] Draw the space-time diagram of the first iteration of this
loop.

loop: ld    r1,0(r2)
      daddi r1,r1,#1
      sd    r1,0(r2)
      daddi r2,r2,#4
      dsub  r4,r3,r2
      bnez  r4,loop

c) [5 marks] In the 5-stage pipeline, assume the longest stage requires
0.8 ns for its compute portion, and 0.1 ns for its write portion.  What
is the clock-cycle time of this 5-stage pipeline?  If a 10-stage pipeline
is produced by splitting all stages in half, what is the cycle time of the
10-stage pipeline?

d) [15 marks] The 10-stage pipeline has some subtleties.  First, each pair
of new boxes is a mini pipeline.  A mini pipeline must finish computing
its result before forwarding the answer to some other mini pipeline.
Second, if the mini pipeline is <a1, a2>, a1 is a hardware device that
cannot be doing two things at once.  Draw the space-time diagram of the
first iteration of this loop executing on the 10-stage pipeline.

loop: ld    r1,0(r2)
      daddi r1,r1,#1
      sd    r1,0(r2)
      daddi r2,r2,#4
      dsub  r4,r3,r2
      bnez  r4,loop

3. Pipeline Performance and Stalls [30 marks]

a) [15 marks] Consider the following code segment:

daddi r5,r0,#3
ld    r1,0(r3)
dadd  r6,r1,r5
ld    r2,0(r4)
dadd  r7,r2,r5

Draw a space-time diagram of the code and show the cycle of the 'w' stage
of each 'dadd'.  Indicate the number of stalls.  Next, replace the m-box
with 3 1-cycle m-boxes.  That is, assume a *7-stage pipeline*, viz.,
'f d x m m m w'.  Draw a space-time diagram of the code and show the cycle
of the 'w' stage of each 'dadd'.  Indicate the number of stalls.  How many
more stalls are there?  How many more stalls per instruction?  Express the
number of stalls as a function of the number of m-boxes.

b) [15 marks] Consider the following code fragment:

loop: ld    r1,0(r3)
      ld    r2,0(r4)
      dadd  r1,r1,r2
      sd    0(r3),r1
      daddi r3,r3,#4
      daddi r4,r4,#4
      dsub  r6,r5,r3
      bnez  r6, loop

The loop iterates 90 times.  Draw a space-time diagram of this code.
Calculate the total execution time of the loop.

4. Floating-Point Pipeline [20 marks]

Consider the following code fragment:

loop: l.d   f0,0(r2)
      l.d   f2,0(r3)
      s.d   f0,0(r2)
      sub.d f4,f4,f0
      add.d f4,f4,f4
      daddi r2,r2,#8
      daddi r3,r3,#8
      dsub  r4,r5,r3
      bnez  r4,loop

Two changes have been made.  Now, both 'sub.d' and 'add.d' have 4 x-boxes.
Functional units have been duplicated and are fully pipelined.  The loop
iterates 90 times.  Draw the space-time diagram of this code.  Calculate
the total execution time of the loop.